readme.md, before:

# Dhaka House Rent predictor : A Machine Learning Program Built from Scratch

A machine learning program to predict house rent in different locations in **Dhaka, Bangladesh**.

## Overview

This project is a simple Python program that predicts house rent at various locations in Dhaka, Bangladesh, using a linear regression model with L2 Regularization built completely from scratch. From data ingestion to rent prediction, this project covers the **all aspects of the machine learning** pipeline, including data preprocessing, feature engineering, model training, and evaluation **without reliance on any external libraries**. The project also **includes a web interface** for user interaction, allowing users to input their own data and receive rent predictions in real-time.

What's truly surprising is that this scratch-built model performs almost identically to highly optimized Scikit-learn's `LinearRegression` in terms of performance metrics like R-squared ($R^2$), Mean Squared Error (MSE), and Mean Absolute Error (MAE). Check out the detailed analysis in the [Performance Analysis](#performance-analysis-against-scikit-learn) section.

Another surprising aspect is that the scratch-built model is **almost 1.9 times faster for smaller datasets** than Scikit-learn's implementation, as shown in the [speedtest.md](./speedtest.md) file. **_However, for bigger datasets, the scratch-built model performs too poorly compared to sklearn's implementation._**

## Table of Contents

- [Engineering Against The Odds](#engineering-against-the-odds)
- [What's Magical About It?](#whats-magical-about-it)
- [Performance Analysis Against Scikit-learn](#performance-analysis-against-scikit-learn)
- [How Does It Work?](#how-does-it-work)
- [Why I Built Everything from Scratch?](#why-i-built-everything-from-scratch)
- [How to Run?](#how-to-run)
- [Usage Example](#usage-example)
- [Further Tweaks](#further-tweaks)
- [Future Plans](#future-plans)
- [Author](#author)
- [License](#license)

## Engineering Against The Odds

This project tackles several challenges by deliberately avoiding common external libraries and frameworks. This approach not only showcases a deep understanding of underlying computational mechanics but also proves that complex tasks can be achieved with foundational knowledge.

- **Using ZERO external dependencies**

  Despite the common reliance on libraries like `Numpy`, `Pandas`, `Scikit-learn`, etc., this project builds everything from the ground up. That includes loading data from CSV files, displaying a download progress bar, training the model, preprocessing data, feature engineering, and even serving the web interface — **all using only Python's standard libraries**. This truly demonstrates a strong grasp of core programming concepts.

- **Unpredictability of house rents in Dhaka**

  House rental prices in Dhaka, Bangladesh, often don't follow straightforward mathematical patterns. Instead, they're heavily influenced by the **socio-economic conditions of a specific location**. For example, houses with **identical specifications** can command **2 to 3 times higher rents in affluent areas like Gulshan** compared to Dakshinkhan. This project uses **clever, domain-specific feature engineering** to capture these unique, location-based patterns.

- **Server backend using `http.server`**

  While most web applications leverage robust frameworks like `Flask` or `Django`, this project showcases Python's built-in `http.server` module to create a simple, lightweight, and self-contained web server. This keeps the entire stack incredibly lean.

- **Implementation of fundamental matrix calculations**

  Instead of relying on highly optimized external libraries for matrix operations, this project implements core linear algebra algorithms from scratch. This includes **Gaussian Elimination** (or Gauss-Jordan Elimination) for matrix inversion, and standard textbook methods for multiplication and transpose. This provides complete control over the mathematical heart of the model, proving its feasibility while still maintaining suitable performance for the dataset size.

## What's Magical About It?

- **Zero External Dependencies**

  From model training to the web interface and its backend — **everything is built using Python’s standard library only**!

  ⛌ No `Numpy`, `Pandas`, or **similar data manipulation libraries.**  
  ⛌ No `Flask`, `Django`, `FastAPI`, **or other web frameworks.**  
  🗸 Exclusively uses built-in Python libraries (e.g., `csv`, `json`, `http.server`).  
  ⛌ No `Scikit-learn`, `TensorFlow`, or **other machine learning libraries.**

  A minimalist [`pyproject.toml`](./pyproject.toml) confirms zero external runtime dependencies.

- **Domain-Specific Feature Engineering**

  The project incorporates a **feature engineering** step that groups data based on location. This is absolutely crucial for capturing the unique characteristics of each area, which significantly drive rent prices in Dhaka.

  [[Code: `app/handler/data/preprocess.py`](./app/handler/data/preprocess.py)]

- **Linear Regression from Scratch**
  The model uses a vector algebra–based linear regression approach for rent prediction. The formula used to determine the weight vector ($\theta$) is:
  $$\theta = (X^T X + \lambda I)^{-1} X^T Y$$
  where:

  - $X$ is the feature matrix
  - $Y$ is the target vector (rent prices)
  - $\lambda$ is the L2 regularization parameter, and $I$ is the identity matrix.

  This entire algorithm is implemented from scratch, without any typical ML libraries like `Scikit-learn`.

  [[Code: `app/model/linear_regression.py`](./app/model/linear_regression.py)]

  For the matrix calculation part of the mentioned equation, it uses custom implementations of matrix and vector operations.

  [[Code: `app/model/matrix_calculation.py`](./app/model/matrix_calculation.py)]

- **Web Interface (No Streamlit!)**

  A clean HTML+Tailwind interface lets users enter location, bedroom count, washroom count, and area to get a rent prediction. And for the frontend? Just clean HTML, Tailwind CSS (via CDN), and vanilla JS in a script tag. No heavy frameworks!

  [[Code: `app/ui/index.html`](./app/ui/index.html)]

- **Real Dataset (from bproperty.com)**

  Uses real housing data extracted from bproperty.com (sourced from Kaggle) to train the model. The dataset CSV files are conveniently hosted on GitHub Gist. Two dataset files are provided: one raw CSV from Kaggle, and another processed CSV where unnecessary columns are removed, data types are fixed, and new columns are added to better capture the unique domain-specific conditions of different locations in Dhaka.

  [[See dataset Gist URL in `config.py`](./config.py)]

- **Custom CLI Download Progress Bar (No tqdm!)**

  Yes, even the download progress bar is built from scratch using `sys.stdout` — no `tqdm` used here! For downloading the dataset, the `requests` module was intentionally avoided, opting for `urllib` instead. You can see how it looks in the screenshot attached [below](#further-tweaks).

  [[Code: `app/handler/data/download.py`](./app/handler/data/download.py)]

## Performance Analysis Against Scikit-learn

I ran benchmark tests against Scikit-learn's `LinearRegression` based on 5-fold cross-validation, determining R-squared ($R^2$), Mean Squared Error (MSE), and Mean Absolute Error (MAE). I found that **the custom implementation performs almost identically, and in some instances, even marginally better than the highly optimized Scikit-learn library.** The differences in performance metrics are often in the **decimal places**, highlighting the precision of the from-scratch approach.

For this specific dataset provided through the GitHub Gist, the Scikit-Learn's `LinearRegression` model works noticeably slower than the scratch-built model. The custom implementation is not only faster but also achieves comparable or better performance metrics for the same dataset. The Scikit-Learn's model performed **almost 1.9 times slower than my scratch-built model for smaller datasets**. Speedtest results are available in the [speedtest.md](./speedtest.md) file. However, to be fair, the Scikit-learn model is more optimized for larger datasets, and the performance gap may narrow or even reverse with larger datasets. And it is as shown in the [speedtest.md](./speedtest.md) file, the scratch-built model performs too poorly compared to Scikit-learn's implementation for bigger datasets.  
**_Note that the performance characteristics may vary with different datasets and configurations._**

My step-by-step procedures and detailed [benchmark test results](./benchmarks.md#benchmark-test-results) are documented in the [benchmarks.md](./benchmarks.md) file.

### Key Observations in Benchmark Results:

1.  **Negative R Squared Values:**

    Some folds show negative $R^2$ values, indicating that the model performs worse than a naive mean prediction. This is expected in linear regression when the model does not fit the data well. Crucially, **both the scratch-built and Scikit-learn models** show identical negative $R^2$ values when this occurs.

2.  **Occasional Superiority:**

    In several instances, the scratch-built model's metrics are slightly better than Scikit-learn's for a given fold. While these differences are very small, they are consistently observed across different metrics ($R^2$, MSE, MAE) and for certain locations/folds.

    - **Example (Adabor, Dhaka - Fold 4):**
      - $R^2$ (Scratch): `0.44251`, $R^2$ (Sklearn): `0.44251`
      - MSE (Scratch): `7105196.01991`, MSE (Sklearn): `7105196.0271` (lower MSE is better)
      - MAE (Scratch): `2091.93698`, MAE (Sklearn): `2091.93698` (lower MAE is better)

3.  **Consistency and Similar Performance:**

    Across almost all locations and evaluation folds, the $R^2$, MSE, and MAE scores for the scratch-built model are incredibly close to those of the Scikit-learn model. This pattern of near-identical or slightly superior performance is observed consistently across various locations such as Adabor, Mohammadpur, Uttar Khan, and others. The differences are negligible, often within the range of floating-point precision errors. This strongly indicates that the scratch implementation is effectively equivalent to Scikit-learn's optimized version in terms of predictive accuracy.

    - **Example (Adabor, Dhaka - Fold 1):**
      - $R^2$ (Scratch): `0.54638`, $R^2$ (Sklearn): `0.54638`
      - MSE (Scratch): `23579784.62581`, MSE (Sklearn): `23579784.59745`
      - MAE (Scratch): `2649.31827`, MAE (Sklearn): `2649.31827`

    Such minute differences are well within acceptable margins for floating-point arithmetic and different internal optimization strategies, essentially signifying identical performance.

### Summary of Performance Analysis

The performance analysis shows that the scratch-built linear regression model is not only competitive with Scikit-learn's implementation but also demonstrates a deep understanding of the underlying mechanics of machine learning. The results indicate that the custom implementation can achieve similar or even slightly better performance metrics while being significantly faster for **this specific dataset**.

## How Does It Work?

- **Data downloading**

  Downloads the CSV file from GitHub Gist using `urllib` and saves it to a local file. Shows a CLI download progress bar built from scratch using `sys.stdout` to indicate the download progress.

  [[Logic: `app/handler/data/download.py`](./app/handler/data/download.py)]

- **Preprocessing and feature engineering**

  The raw data is preprocessed to remove unnecessary columns, encode categorical variables, and create new columns that capture domain-specific conditions of different locations in Dhaka.

  [[Logic: `app/handler/data/preprocess.py`](./app/handler/data/preprocess.py)]

- **Model training**

  Determines the weight vectors for each location in the preprocessed data using the linear regression model with L2 regularization ($ \theta = (X^T X + \lambda I)^{-1} X^T Y $) and stores these weight vectors in a local JSON file.

  [[Logic: `app/model/train.py`](./app/model/train.py)]

- **Serves UI**

  Serves the UI using a web server whose backend is built using the `http.server` module and frontend using HTML, Tailwind CSS (via CDN), and vanilla JavaScript.

  [[Backend: `app/handler/web/http.py`](./app/handler/web/http.py)]
  [[Frontend: `app/ui/index.html`](./app/ui/index.html)]

- **Prediction**

  Takes user input from the web interface, preprocesses it, and uses the trained location-specific model to predict the rent based on the input data.

  [[Logic: `app/handler/predict.py`](./app/handler/predict.py)]

## Why I Built Everything from Scratch?

Most machine learning projects rely heavily on pre-built libraries. But I wanted to deeply understand how things _actually_ work under the hood — from CSV parsing to matrix algebra to model training and web serving. That’s why I made a rule: **no external dependencies allowed.**

I initially used `polars` for data and considered `streamlit` for UI, until I realized they pulled in heavy dependencies like `numpy`. So I ditched them. I rewrote the data loading logic using `csv`, built my own matrix operations, and crafted the frontend using pure HTML, Tailwind, and JS — no frameworks, no fluff.

This wasn’t just about coding — it was about **learning by building**.

## How to Run?

1. **Clone the repository and execute the run.py file**:
   ```bash
   git clone https://github.com/RakibulHasanRatul/dhaka-house-rent-predictor.git
   cd dhaka-house-rent-predictor
   # no dependencies, so no need to install anything
   python run.py
   ```
2. **Access the web interface**:
   Open your web browser and go to **http://localhost:5000/**. You should see [the interface](#usage-example) where you can input your desired location, number of bedrooms, washrooms, and area to get a rent prediction.
3. **Input your details**:
   - Select your desired location from the dropdown.
   - Input the number of bedrooms and washrooms.
   - Input the area in square feet.
   - Select the type of house (apartment or building or duplex).
4. **Get the prediction**:
   Click the "Predict Rent" button to get the predicted rent value based on your inputs. The prediction will be displayed on the web interface.

Note: This application runs **_entirely through the browser_**. The terminal **only displays logs** — no CLI interaction is required. You can see the screenshot of the terminal logs attached in the [Further Tweaks](#further-tweaks) section below.

## Usage Example

After entering the required details in the web interface, you can click the "Predict Rent" button to get the predicted rent value. The prediction will be displayed like below.

![app interface](./screenshots/app-interface.png)

## Further Tweaks

In the [config.py](./config.py) file, you can adjust the **directory paths and URLs** if you wish to.
By default it will download the **formatted dataset** from the `GitHub Gist` URL and save it in the `data/` directory (will create it if not created already). You can let the program work with the messy dataset sourced from Kaggle by setting the `from_raw_csv` to `True` (in line 34) in `load_data_and_train_model` function defined in [run.py](./run.py) file. The preprocessing logic for Kaggle sourced dataset is defined in [app/handler/data/preprocess.py](./app/handler/data/preprocess.py) (in the `load_and_refit_kaggle_csv` function).

You should see these logs in the terminal when you run the program:

![Terminal Logs](./screenshots/terminal-logs.png)

## Future Plans

- **Improve UI**: Add a CSV input option for bulk predictions.
- **Add more features**: Include more features like parking, balcony, etc. for better predictions.
- **Deploy on a cloud platform**: Host the app on a cloud platform like Heroku or AWS for public access.

## Author

[Rakibul Hasan Ratul](https://github.com/RakibulHasanRatul)  
Independent Developer, Dhaka, Bangladesh  
Email: [rakibulhasanratul@proton.me](mailto:rakibulhasanratul@proton.me)

## License

This project is licensed under the MIT License. See the [LICENSE](./LICENSE) file for details.

Commit message:

Add another stress run for speed test

readme.md, after:

# Dhaka House Rent predictor : A Machine Learning Program Built from Scratch

A machine learning program to predict house rent in different locations in **Dhaka, Bangladesh**.

## Overview

This project is a simple Python program that predicts house rent at various locations in Dhaka, Bangladesh, using a linear regression model with L2 Regularization built completely from scratch. From data ingestion to rent prediction, this project covers the **all aspects of the machine learning** pipeline, including data preprocessing, feature engineering, model training, and evaluation **without reliance on any external libraries**. The project also **includes a web interface** for user interaction, allowing users to input their own data and receive rent predictions in real-time.

What's truly surprising is that this scratch-built model performs almost identically to highly optimized Scikit-learn's `LinearRegression` in terms of performance metrics like R-squared ($R^2$), Mean Squared Error (MSE), and Mean Absolute Error (MAE). Check out the detailed analysis in the [Performance Analysis](#performance-analysis-against-scikit-learn) section.

Even more, the model is speedy too! It results **within 0.2 seconds utilizing pure python**. Detailed speed tests are shown in the [speedtest.md](./speedtest.md) file.

Another surprising aspect is that the scratch-built model is **almost 1.9 times faster for smaller datasets** than Scikit-learn's implementation, as shown in the [speedtest.md](./speedtest.md) file. **_However, for bigger datasets, the scratch-built model performs too poorly compared to sklearn's implementation._**

## Table of Contents

- [Engineering Against The Odds](#engineering-against-the-odds)
- [What's Magical About It?](#whats-magical-about-it)
- [Performance Analysis Against Scikit-learn](#performance-analysis-against-scikit-learn)
- [How Does It Work?](#how-does-it-work)
- [Why I Built Everything from Scratch?](#why-i-built-everything-from-scratch)
- [How to Run?](#how-to-run)
- [Usage Example](#usage-example)
- [Further Tweaks](#further-tweaks)
- [Future Plans](#future-plans)
- [Author](#author)
- [License](#license)

## Engineering Against The Odds

This project tackles several challenges by deliberately avoiding common external libraries and frameworks. This approach not only showcases a deep understanding of underlying computational mechanics but also proves that complex tasks can be achieved with foundational knowledge.

- **Using ZERO external dependencies**

  Despite the common reliance on libraries like `Numpy`, `Pandas`, `Scikit-learn`, etc., this project builds everything from the ground up. That includes loading data from CSV files, displaying a download progress bar, training the model, preprocessing data, feature engineering, and even serving the web interface — **all using only Python's standard libraries**. This truly demonstrates a strong grasp of core programming concepts.

- **Unpredictability of house rents in Dhaka**

  House rental prices in Dhaka, Bangladesh, often don't follow straightforward mathematical patterns. Instead, they're heavily influenced by the **socio-economic conditions of a specific location**. For example, houses with **identical specifications** can command **2 to 3 times higher rents in affluent areas like Gulshan** compared to Dakshinkhan. This project uses **clever, domain-specific feature engineering** to capture these unique, location-based patterns.

- **Server backend using `http.server`**

  While most web applications leverage robust frameworks like `Flask` or `Django`, this project showcases Python's built-in `http.server` module to create a simple, lightweight, and self-contained web server. This keeps the entire stack incredibly lean.

- **Implementation of fundamental matrix calculations**

  Instead of relying on highly optimized external libraries for matrix operations, this project implements core linear algebra algorithms from scratch. This includes **Gaussian Elimination** (or Gauss-Jordan Elimination) for matrix inversion, and standard textbook methods for multiplication and transpose. This provides complete control over the mathematical heart of the model, proving its feasibility while still maintaining suitable performance for the dataset size.

## What's Magical About It?

- **Zero External Dependencies**

  From model training to the web interface and its backend — **everything is built using Python’s standard library only**!

  ⛌ No `Numpy`, `Pandas`, or **similar data manipulation libraries.**  
  ⛌ No `Flask`, `Django`, `FastAPI`, **or other web frameworks.**  
  🗸 Exclusively uses built-in Python libraries (e.g., `csv`, `json`, `http.server`).  
  ⛌ No `Scikit-learn`, `TensorFlow`, or **other machine learning libraries.**

  A minimalist [`pyproject.toml`](./pyproject.toml) confirms zero external runtime dependencies.

- **Domain-Specific Feature Engineering**

  The project incorporates a **feature engineering** step that groups data based on location. This is absolutely crucial for capturing the unique characteristics of each area, which significantly drive rent prices in Dhaka.

  [[Code: `app/handler/data/preprocess.py`](./app/handler/data/preprocess.py)]

- **Linear Regression from Scratch**
  The model uses a vector algebra–based linear regression approach for rent prediction. The formula used to determine the weight vector ($\theta$) is:
  $$\theta = (X^T X + \lambda I)^{-1} X^T Y$$
  where:

  - $X$ is the feature matrix
  - $Y$ is the target vector (rent prices)
  - $\lambda$ is the L2 regularization parameter, and $I$ is the identity matrix.

  This entire algorithm is implemented from scratch, without any typical ML libraries like `Scikit-learn`.

  [[Code: `app/model/linear_regression.py`](./app/model/linear_regression.py)]

  For the matrix calculation part of the mentioned equation, it uses custom implementations of matrix and vector operations.

  [[Code: `app/model/matrix_calculation.py`](./app/model/matrix_calculation.py)]

- **Web Interface (No Streamlit!)**

  A clean HTML+Tailwind interface lets users enter location, bedroom count, washroom count, and area to get a rent prediction. And for the frontend? Just clean HTML, Tailwind CSS (via CDN), and vanilla JS in a script tag. No heavy frameworks!

  [[Code: `app/ui/index.html`](./app/ui/index.html)]

- **Real Dataset (from bproperty.com)**

  Uses real housing data extracted from bproperty.com (sourced from Kaggle) to train the model. The dataset CSV files are conveniently hosted on GitHub Gist. Two dataset files are provided: one raw CSV from Kaggle, and another processed CSV where unnecessary columns are removed, data types are fixed, and new columns are added to better capture the unique domain-specific conditions of different locations in Dhaka.

  [[See dataset Gist URL in `config.py`](./config.py)]

- **Custom CLI Download Progress Bar (No tqdm!)**

  Yes, even the download progress bar is built from scratch using `sys.stdout` — no `tqdm` used here! For downloading the dataset, the `requests` module was intentionally avoided, opting for `urllib` instead. You can see how it looks in the screenshot attached [below](#further-tweaks).

  [[Code: `app/handler/data/download.py`](./app/handler/data/download.py)]

## Performance Analysis Against Scikit-learn

I ran benchmark tests against Scikit-learn's `LinearRegression` based on 5-fold cross-validation, determining R-squared ($R^2$), Mean Squared Error (MSE), and Mean Absolute Error (MAE). I found that **the custom implementation performs almost identically, and in some instances, even marginally better than the highly optimized Scikit-learn library.** The differences in performance metrics are often in the **decimal places**, highlighting the precision of the from-scratch approach.

For this specific dataset provided through the GitHub Gist, the Scikit-Learn's `LinearRegression` model works noticeably slower than the scratch-built model. The custom implementation is not only faster but also achieves comparable or better performance metrics for the same dataset. The Scikit-Learn's model performed **almost 1.9 times slower than my scratch-built model for smaller datasets**. Speedtest results are available in the [speedtest.md](./speedtest.md) file. However, to be fair, the Scikit-learn model is more optimized for larger datasets, and the performance gap may narrow or even reverse with larger datasets. And it is as shown in the [speedtest.md](./speedtest.md) file, the scratch-built model performs too poorly compared to Scikit-learn's implementation for bigger datasets.  
**_Note that the performance characteristics may vary with different datasets and configurations._**

My step-by-step procedures and detailed [benchmark test results](./benchmarks.md#benchmark-test-results) are documented in the [benchmarks.md](./benchmarks.md) file.

### Key Observations in Benchmark Results:

1.  **Negative R Squared Values:**

    Some folds show negative $R^2$ values, indicating that the model performs worse than a naive mean prediction. This is expected in linear regression when the model does not fit the data well. Crucially, **both the scratch-built and Scikit-learn models** show identical negative $R^2$ values when this occurs.

2.  **Occasional Superiority:**

    In several instances, the scratch-built model's metrics are slightly better than Scikit-learn's for a given fold. While these differences are very small, they are consistently observed across different metrics ($R^2$, MSE, MAE) and for certain locations/folds.

    - **Example (Adabor, Dhaka - Fold 4):**
      - $R^2$ (Scratch): `0.44251`, $R^2$ (Sklearn): `0.44251`
      - MSE (Scratch): `7105196.01991`, MSE (Sklearn): `7105196.0271` (lower MSE is better)
      - MAE (Scratch): `2091.93698`, MAE (Sklearn): `2091.93698` (lower MAE is better)

3.  **Consistency and Similar Performance:**

    Across almost all locations and evaluation folds, the $R^2$, MSE, and MAE scores for the scratch-built model are incredibly close to those of the Scikit-learn model. This pattern of near-identical or slightly superior performance is observed consistently across various locations such as Adabor, Mohammadpur, Uttar Khan, and others. The differences are negligible, often within the range of floating-point precision errors. This strongly indicates that the scratch implementation is effectively equivalent to Scikit-learn's optimized version in terms of predictive accuracy.

    - **Example (Adabor, Dhaka - Fold 1):**
      - $R^2$ (Scratch): `0.54638`, $R^2$ (Sklearn): `0.54638`
      - MSE (Scratch): `23579784.62581`, MSE (Sklearn): `23579784.59745`
      - MAE (Scratch): `2649.31827`, MAE (Sklearn): `2649.31827`

    Such minute differences are well within acceptable margins for floating-point arithmetic and different internal optimization strategies, essentially signifying identical performance.

### Summary of Performance Analysis

The performance analysis shows that the scratch-built linear regression model is not only competitive with Scikit-learn's implementation but also demonstrates a deep understanding of the underlying mechanics of machine learning. The results indicate that the custom implementation can achieve similar or even slightly better performance metrics while being significantly faster for **this specific dataset**.

## How Does It Work?

- **Data downloading**

  Downloads the CSV file from GitHub Gist using `urllib` and saves it to a local file. Shows a CLI download progress bar built from scratch using `sys.stdout` to indicate the download progress.

  [[Logic: `app/handler/data/download.py`](./app/handler/data/download.py)]

- **Preprocessing and feature engineering**

  The raw data is preprocessed to remove unnecessary columns, encode categorical variables, and create new columns that capture domain-specific conditions of different locations in Dhaka.

  [[Logic: `app/handler/data/preprocess.py`](./app/handler/data/preprocess.py)]

- **Model training**

  Determines the weight vectors for each location in the preprocessed data using the linear regression model with L2 regularization ($ \theta = (X^T X + \lambda I)^{-1} X^T Y $) and stores these weight vectors in a local JSON file.

  [[Logic: `app/model/train.py`](./app/model/train.py)]

- **Serves UI**

  Serves the UI using a web server whose backend is built using the `http.server` module and frontend using HTML, Tailwind CSS (via CDN), and vanilla JavaScript.

  [[Backend: `app/handler/web/http.py`](./app/handler/web/http.py)]
  [[Frontend: `app/ui/index.html`](./app/ui/index.html)]

- **Prediction**

  Takes user input from the web interface, preprocesses it, and uses the trained location-specific model to predict the rent based on the input data.

  [[Logic: `app/handler/predict.py`](./app/handler/predict.py)]

## Why I Built Everything from Scratch?

Most machine learning projects rely heavily on pre-built libraries. But I wanted to deeply understand how things _actually_ work under the hood — from CSV parsing to matrix algebra to model training and web serving. That’s why I made a rule: **no external dependencies allowed.**

I initially used `polars` for data and considered `streamlit` for UI, until I realized they pulled in heavy dependencies like `numpy`. So I ditched them. I rewrote the data loading logic using `csv`, built my own matrix operations, and crafted the frontend using pure HTML, Tailwind, and JS — no frameworks, no fluff.

This wasn’t just about coding — it was about **learning by building**.

## How to Run?

1. **Clone the repository and execute the run.py file**:
   ```bash
   git clone https://github.com/RakibulHasanRatul/dhaka-house-rent-predictor.git
   cd dhaka-house-rent-predictor
   # no dependencies, so no need to install anything
   python run.py
   ```
2. **Access the web interface**:
   Open your web browser and go to **http://localhost:5000/**. You should see [the interface](#usage-example) where you can input your desired location, number of bedrooms, washrooms, and area to get a rent prediction.
3. **Input your details**:
   - Select your desired location from the dropdown.
   - Input the number of bedrooms and washrooms.
   - Input the area in square feet.
   - Select the type of house (apartment or building or duplex).
4. **Get the prediction**:
   Click the "Predict Rent" button to get the predicted rent value based on your inputs. The prediction will be displayed on the web interface.

Note: This application runs **_entirely through the browser_**. The terminal **only displays logs** — no CLI interaction is required. You can see the screenshot of the terminal logs attached in the [Further Tweaks](#further-tweaks) section below.

## Usage Example

After entering the required details in the web interface, you can click the "Predict Rent" button to get the predicted rent value. The prediction will be displayed like below.

![app interface](./screenshots/app-interface.png)

## Further Tweaks

In the [config.py](./config.py) file, you can adjust the **directory paths and URLs** if you wish to.
By default it will download the **formatted dataset** from the `GitHub Gist` URL and save it in the `data/` directory (will create it if not created already). You can let the program work with the messy dataset sourced from Kaggle by setting the `from_raw_csv` to `True` (in line 34) in `load_data_and_train_model` function defined in [run.py](./run.py) file. The preprocessing logic for Kaggle sourced dataset is defined in [app/handler/data/preprocess.py](./app/handler/data/preprocess.py) (in the `load_and_refit_kaggle_csv` function).

You should see these logs in the terminal when you run the program:

![Terminal Logs](./screenshots/terminal-logs.png)

## Future Plans

- **Improve UI**: Add a CSV input option for bulk predictions.
- **Add more features**: Include more features like parking, balcony, etc. for better predictions.
- **Deploy on a cloud platform**: Host the app on a cloud platform like Heroku or AWS for public access.

## Author

[Rakibul Hasan Ratul](https://github.com/RakibulHasanRatul)  
Independent Developer, Dhaka, Bangladesh  
Email: [rakibulhasanratul@proton.me](mailto:rakibulhasanratul@proton.me)

## License

This project is licensed under the MIT License. See the [LICENSE](./LICENSE) file for details.
